docs/BTC_PREDICTION_STATUS.md, before:

# BTC Price Prediction & Backtesting - Status

## Overview

This document tracks the status of integrating AI models (Lag-Llama/Chronos-Bolt) to predict Bitcoin prices 15 minutes ahead for Polymarket BTC 15-minute markets.

## Current Status: 🟡 In Progress

### ✅ Completed

1. **BTC Data Fetcher** (`agents/connectors/btc_data.py`)
   - ✓ Fetches historical BTC OHLCV data from Binance API (public endpoint, no API key required)
   - ✓ Supports multiple intervals: 1m, 5m, 15m, 1h, 4h, 1d
   - ✓ Automatic caching to Parquet files (`./data/btc_cache/`)
   - ✓ Rate limiting (1.2s between requests, well under Binance's 1200 req/min limit)
   - ✓ Methods:
     - `get_prices()` - Get OHLCV data for time range
     - `get_price_sequence()` - Get price sequence for model input (200 data points)
     - `get_price_at_time()` - Get price at specific timestamp
   - ✓ Tested and working

2. **Test Scripts**
   - ✓ `scripts/python/test_btc_fetcher.py` - Tests BTC data fetching
   - ✓ `scripts/python/test_model_integration.py` - Tests model integration

3. **Simple Baseline Predictions**
   - ✓ Last price baseline
   - ✓ Moving average predictions
   - ✓ Linear trend projections

### ✅ Completed (Recent Updates)

1. **Historical Market Fetcher** (`agents/backtesting/market_fetcher.py`)
   - ✓ Fetches closed/resolved BTC 15-minute markets from Polymarket API
   - ✓ Filters markets by date range
   - ✓ Extracts market metadata (start time, outcomes, etc.)
   - ✓ Enriches markets with BTC price data
   - ✓ Supports sequential processing for cache efficiency

2. **Backtesting Framework** (`agents/backtesting/btc_backtester.py`)
   - ✓ Processes markets sequentially
   - ✓ Runs predictions using configured model
   - ✓ Compares predictions to actual outcomes
   - ✓ Calculates performance metrics:
     - Win rate
     - P&L (profit/loss)
     - Sharpe ratio
     - Profit factor
     - Mean Absolute Error
   - ✓ Supports saving results to CSV

3. **Model Integration** (`agents/models/btc_predictor.py`)
   - ✓ Improved Lag-Llama integration (with PyTorch support)
   - ✓ Improved Chronos-Bolt integration (with PyTorch support)
   - ✓ Graceful fallback to baseline if models unavailable
   - ✓ Proper data normalization and denormalization
   - ⚠️ Full model inference requires PyTorch installation

### 🟡 In Progress

1. **Model Testing**
   - ⚠️ Lag-Llama: Cannot test (PyTorch not installed)
   - ⚠️ Chronos-Bolt: Cannot test (PyTorch not installed)
   - ⚠️ Need to install dependencies and retest

### ❌ Blocked / Missing

1. **Dependencies**
   - ❌ PyTorch - Required for Lag-Llama/Chronos models (optional, commented in requirements.txt)
   - ❌ Transformers (HuggingFace) - Required for model loading (optional, commented in requirements.txt)
   - ✓ PyArrow - Already installed (required for Parquet caching)

2. **Model Testing**
   - ⚠️ Full Lag-Llama inference needs testing (requires PyTorch)
   - ⚠️ Full Chronos-Bolt inference needs testing (requires PyTorch)
   - ✓ Data formatting implemented
   - ✓ Inference pipeline setup implemented

## Architecture

### Data Flow

```
Polymarket Market (15-min window)
    ↓
Extract market start timestamp
    ↓
BTC Data Fetcher
    ↓
Get 200 minutes of BTC price history (1-minute intervals)
    ↓
Format for AI Model
    ↓
Model Prediction (15 minutes ahead)
    ↓
Compare to Actual Outcome
    ↓
Calculate Performance Metrics
```

### Sequential Processing Strategy

Markets are processed chronologically to maximize cache efficiency:

- **Market 1** (2:00 PM): Fetch 200 minutes of BTC data (12:00 PM - 2:00 PM)
- **Market 2** (2:15 PM): Reuse 185 minutes from cache (12:15 PM - 2:00 PM), fetch only 15 new minutes
- **Market 3** (2:30 PM): Reuse 185 minutes from cache, fetch only 15 new minutes
- **Cache hit rate**: ~92.5% (185/200 minutes reused)

## Usage

### BTC Data Fetcher

```python
from agents.connectors.btc_data import BTCDataFetcher
from datetime import datetime, timedelta, timezone

# Initialize fetcher
fetcher = BTCDataFetcher()

# Get price sequence for model input (recommended: 200 minutes, 1-minute intervals)
timestamp = datetime.now(timezone.utc)
sequence = fetcher.get_price_sequence(
    timestamp=timestamp,
    lookback_minutes=200,  # 200 data points
    interval='1m'          # 1-minute intervals
)
# Returns: [price_t-200, price_t-199, ..., price_t-1, price_t]

# Get OHLCV data for a time range
start = datetime(2024, 1, 1, tzinfo=timezone.utc)
end = datetime(2024, 1, 2, tzinfo=timezone.utc)
df = fetcher.get_prices(start, end, interval='1m')
# Returns DataFrame: timestamp, open, high, low, close, volume
```

### Testing

```bash
# Test BTC data fetcher
python scripts/python/test_btc_fetcher.py

# Test model integration (requires PyTorch)
python scripts/python/test_model_integration.py
```

## Dependencies

### Required (for basic functionality)
- `httpx` - API requests
- `pandas` - Data manipulation
- `numpy` - Numerical operations

### Required (for caching)
- `pyarrow` - Parquet file support
  ```bash
  pip install pyarrow
  ```

### Required (for AI models)
- `torch` - PyTorch (for model inference)
  ```bash
  pip install torch
  ```
- `transformers` - HuggingFace transformers (for model loading)
  ```bash
  pip install transformers
  ```

## Model Details

### Lag-Llama (Probabilistic Forecasting)
- **Model**: `time-series-foundation-models/Lag-Llama`
- **Output**: Distribution (Student's t-distribution) - perfect for uncertainty quantification
- **Use case**: When you need confidence intervals (e.g., "90% CI suggests price > threshold")
- **Status**: ⚠️ Not tested (PyTorch missing)

### Chronos-Bolt (High-Frequency Forecasting)
- **Model**: `amazon/chronos-t5-tiny` (or other Chronos variants)
- **Output**: Point prediction (fast inference)
- **Use case**: When you need sub-second predictions or many predictions
- **Status**: ⚠️ Not tested (PyTorch missing)

### Recommended Settings
- **Interval**: `1m` (1-minute intervals)
- **Lookback**: 200 minutes (~3.3 hours of history)
- **Prediction horizon**: 15 minutes ahead

## Performance Metrics (Planned)

Once backtesting is implemented, we'll track:

1. **Primary Metrics**
   - Win rate (% correct predictions)
   - Expected Value (EV)
   - Sharpe ratio
   - Profit factor

2. **Secondary Metrics**
   - Calibration (Brier score)
   - Information coefficient
   - Maximum drawdown
   - Win/loss ratio

3. **Model-Specific Metrics**
   - Lag-Llama: Confidence interval accuracy
   - Chronos-Bolt: Prediction latency vs accuracy tradeoff

## Next Steps

1. **Install Dependencies (Optional - for AI models)**
   ```bash
   pip install torch transformers
   ```
   Note: PyArrow is already installed. PyTorch and transformers are optional and only needed for Lag-Llama/Chronos models.

2. **Test Model Integration**
   - Run `test_model_integration.py` to test model loading
   - Verify Lag-Llama and Chronos can load (requires PyTorch)
   - Test with actual BTC price sequences

3. **Test Backtesting Framework**
   - Run `test_backtesting.py` to test the backtesting framework
   - Verify market fetching works
   - Verify backtesting produces results

4. **Run Full Backtest**
   - Use `run_backtest()` function or `BTCBacktester` class
   - Process historical markets
   - Analyze results and metrics

5. **Model Fine-tuning (Future)**
   - Test actual model inference once PyTorch is installed
   - Fine-tune model parameters
   - Compare model performance vs baseline

## File Structure

```
agents/
  connectors/
    btc_data.py          # BTC data fetcher (✓ Working)
  backtesting/           # (✓ Created)
    __init__.py          # Package init
    btc_backtester.py    # Backtesting framework (✓ Implemented)
    market_fetcher.py    # Historical market fetcher (✓ Implemented)
  models/
    btc_predictor.py     # BTC predictor with model integration (✓ Improved)

scripts/python/
  test_btc_fetcher.py           # Test BTC fetcher (✓ Working)
  test_model_integration.py     # Test model integration (⚠️ Needs PyTorch)
  test_backtesting.py           # Test backtesting framework (✓ Created)

data/
  btc_cache/            # Cached BTC data (Parquet files)
```

## Notes

- **No API Key Required**: Binance public endpoint works without authentication
- **Rate Limits**: Binance allows 1200 requests/minute (IP-based) - code includes rate limiting
- **Caching**: Data cached locally in Parquet format for fast access
- **Sequential Processing**: Recommended for cache efficiency (92.5% hit rate)

## Issues / Known Problems

1. **PyTorch Installation Issue**
   - Error: "Failed to load PyTorch C extensions"
   - May need to reinstall PyTorch or use different installation method
   - See: https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/

2. **PyArrow Missing**
   - Caching works but can't save to Parquet
   - Install: `pip install pyarrow`

## References

- [Binance API Documentation](https://binance-docs.github.io/apidocs/spot/en/#kline-candlestick-data)
- [Lag-Llama Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08278)
- [Chronos Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07815)
- [Polymarket API](https://docs.polymarket.com/)

## Last Updated

2026-01-05

## Recent Changes

- ✅ Implemented Historical Market Fetcher (`agents/backtesting/market_fetcher.py`)
- ✅ Implemented Backtesting Framework (`agents/backtesting/btc_backtester.py`)
- ✅ Improved model integration for Lag-Llama and Chronos-Bolt
- ✅ Created test script for backtesting (`scripts/python/test_backtesting.py`)
- ✅ Updated status documentation

Commit message:

for logging current runs and backtesting

docs/BTC_PREDICTION_STATUS.md, after:

# BTC Price Prediction & Backtesting - Status

## Overview

This document tracks the status of integrating AI models (Lag-Llama/Chronos-Bolt) to predict Bitcoin prices 15 minutes ahead for Polymarket BTC 15-minute markets.

## Current Status: 🟡 In Progress

### ✅ Completed

1. **BTC Data Fetcher** (`agents/connectors/btc_data.py`)
   - ✓ Fetches historical BTC OHLCV data from Binance API (public endpoint, no API key required)
   - ✓ Supports multiple intervals: 1m, 5m, 15m, 1h, 4h, 1d
   - ✓ Automatic caching to Parquet files (`./data/btc_cache/`)
   - ✓ Rate limiting (1.2s between requests, well under Binance's 1200 req/min limit)
   - ✓ Methods:
     - `get_prices()` - Get OHLCV data for time range
     - `get_price_sequence()` - Get price sequence for model input (200 data points)
     - `get_price_at_time()` - Get price at specific timestamp
   - ✓ Tested and working

2. **Test Scripts**
   - ✓ `scripts/python/test_btc_fetcher.py` - Tests BTC data fetching
   - ✓ `scripts/python/test_model_integration.py` - Tests model integration

3. **Simple Baseline Predictions**
   - ✓ Last price baseline
   - ✓ Moving average predictions
   - ✓ Linear trend projections

### ✅ Completed (Recent Updates)

1. **Historical Market Fetcher** (`agents/backtesting/market_fetcher.py`)
   - ✓ Fetches closed/resolved BTC 15-minute markets from Polymarket API
   - ✓ Filters markets by date range
   - ✓ Extracts market metadata (start time, outcomes, etc.)
   - ✓ Enriches markets with BTC price data
   - ✓ Supports sequential processing for cache efficiency

2. **Backtesting Framework** (`agents/backtesting/btc_backtester.py`)
   - ✓ Processes markets sequentially
   - ✓ Runs predictions using configured model
   - ✓ Compares predictions to actual outcomes
   - ✓ Calculates performance metrics:
     - Win rate
     - P&L (profit/loss)
     - Sharpe ratio
     - Profit factor
     - Mean Absolute Error
   - ✓ Supports saving results to CSV

3. **Model Integration** (`agents/models/btc_predictor.py`)
   - ✓ Improved Lag-Llama integration (with PyTorch support)
   - ✓ Improved Chronos-Bolt integration (with PyTorch support)
   - ✓ Graceful fallback to baseline if models unavailable
   - ✓ Proper data normalization and denormalization
   - ⚠️ Full model inference requires PyTorch installation

### 🟡 In Progress

1. **Model Testing**
   - ⚠️ Lag-Llama: Not available (gluonts 0.16.2 doesn't include Lag-Llama module)
   - ✓ Chronos-Bolt: Working (tested and functional)
   - ✓ Baseline: Working (fallback predictor)

### ❌ Blocked / Missing

1. **Dependencies**
   - ❌ PyTorch - Required for Lag-Llama/Chronos models (optional, commented in requirements.txt)
   - ❌ Transformers (HuggingFace) - Required for model loading (optional, commented in requirements.txt)
   - ✓ PyArrow - Already installed (required for Parquet caching)

2. **Model Testing**
   - ⚠️ Lag-Llama: Not available in current setup (gluonts 0.16.2 doesn't include it)
   - ✓ Chronos-Bolt: Working and tested
   - ✓ Baseline: Working and tested
   - ✓ Data formatting implemented
   - ✓ Inference pipeline setup implemented

## Architecture

### Data Flow

```
Polymarket Market (15-min window)
    ↓
Extract market start timestamp
    ↓
BTC Data Fetcher
    ↓
Get 200 minutes of BTC price history (1-minute intervals)
    ↓
Format for AI Model
    ↓
Model Prediction (15 minutes ahead)
    ↓
Compare to Actual Outcome
    ↓
Calculate Performance Metrics
```

### Sequential Processing Strategy

Markets are processed chronologically to maximize cache efficiency:

- **Market 1** (2:00 PM): Fetch 200 minutes of BTC data (12:00 PM - 2:00 PM)
- **Market 2** (2:15 PM): Reuse 185 minutes from cache (12:15 PM - 2:00 PM), fetch only 15 new minutes
- **Market 3** (2:30 PM): Reuse 185 minutes from cache, fetch only 15 new minutes
- **Cache hit rate**: ~92.5% (185/200 minutes reused)

## Usage

### BTC Data Fetcher

```python
from agents.connectors.btc_data import BTCDataFetcher
from datetime import datetime, timedelta, timezone

# Initialize fetcher
fetcher = BTCDataFetcher()

# Get price sequence for model input (recommended: 200 minutes, 1-minute intervals)
timestamp = datetime.now(timezone.utc)
sequence = fetcher.get_price_sequence(
    timestamp=timestamp,
    lookback_minutes=200,  # 200 data points
    interval='1m'          # 1-minute intervals
)
# Returns: [price_t-200, price_t-199, ..., price_t-1, price_t]

# Get OHLCV data for a time range
start = datetime(2024, 1, 1, tzinfo=timezone.utc)
end = datetime(2024, 1, 2, tzinfo=timezone.utc)
df = fetcher.get_prices(start, end, interval='1m')
# Returns DataFrame: timestamp, open, high, low, close, volume
```

### Testing

```bash
# Test BTC data fetcher
python scripts/python/test_btc_fetcher.py

# Test model integration (requires PyTorch)
python scripts/python/test_model_integration.py
```

## Dependencies

### Required (for basic functionality)
- `httpx` - API requests
- `pandas` - Data manipulation
- `numpy` - Numerical operations

### Required (for caching)
- `pyarrow` - Parquet file support
  ```bash
  pip install pyarrow
  ```

### Required (for AI models)
- `torch` - PyTorch (for model inference)
  ```bash
  pip install torch
  ```
- `transformers` - HuggingFace transformers (for model loading)
  ```bash
  pip install transformers
  ```

## Model Details

### Lag-Llama (Probabilistic Forecasting)
- **Model**: `time-series-foundation-models/Lag-Llama`
- **Output**: Distribution (Student's t-distribution) - perfect for uncertainty quantification
- **Use case**: When you need confidence intervals (e.g., "90% CI suggests price > threshold")
- **Status**: ⚠️ Not available (requires specific implementation)
  - gluonts 0.16.2 installed ✓
  - Lag-Llama module not available in this gluonts version
  - HuggingFace model exists but lacks standard config.json for transformers
  - Falls back to baseline predictor

### Chronos-Bolt (High-Frequency Forecasting)
- **Model**: `amazon/chronos-t5-tiny` (or other Chronos variants)
- **Output**: Point prediction (fast inference)
- **Use case**: When you need sub-second predictions or many predictions
- **Status**: ⚠️ Not tested (PyTorch missing)

### Recommended Settings
- **Interval**: `1m` (1-minute intervals)
- **Lookback**: 200 minutes (~3.3 hours of history)
- **Prediction horizon**: 15 minutes ahead

## Performance Metrics (Planned)

Once backtesting is implemented, we'll track:

1. **Primary Metrics**
   - Win rate (% correct predictions)
   - Expected Value (EV)
   - Sharpe ratio
   - Profit factor

2. **Secondary Metrics**
   - Calibration (Brier score)
   - Information coefficient
   - Maximum drawdown
   - Win/loss ratio

3. **Model-Specific Metrics**
   - Lag-Llama: Confidence interval accuracy
   - Chronos-Bolt: Prediction latency vs accuracy tradeoff

## Next Steps

1. **Install Dependencies (Optional - for AI models)**
   ```bash
   pip install torch transformers
   ```
   Note: PyArrow is already installed. PyTorch and transformers are optional and only needed for Lag-Llama/Chronos models.

2. **Test Model Integration**
   - Run `test_model_integration.py` to test model loading
   - Verify Lag-Llama and Chronos can load (requires PyTorch)
   - Test with actual BTC price sequences

3. **Test Backtesting Framework**
   - Run `test_backtesting.py` to test the backtesting framework
   - Verify market fetching works
   - Verify backtesting produces results

4. **Run Full Backtest**
   - Use `run_backtest()` function or `BTCBacktester` class
   - Process historical markets
   - Analyze results and metrics

5. **Model Fine-tuning (Future)**
   - Test actual model inference once PyTorch is installed
   - Fine-tune model parameters
   - Compare model performance vs baseline

## File Structure

```
agents/
  connectors/
    btc_data.py          # BTC data fetcher (✓ Working)
  backtesting/           # (✓ Created)
    __init__.py          # Package init
    btc_backtester.py    # Backtesting framework (✓ Implemented)
    market_fetcher.py    # Historical market fetcher (✓ Implemented)
  models/
    btc_predictor.py     # BTC predictor with model integration (✓ Improved)

scripts/python/
  test_btc_fetcher.py           # Test BTC fetcher (✓ Working)
  test_model_integration.py     # Test model integration (⚠️ Needs PyTorch)
  test_backtesting.py           # Test backtesting framework (✓ Created)

data/
  btc_cache/            # Cached BTC data (Parquet files)
```

## Notes

- **No API Key Required**: Binance public endpoint works without authentication
- **Rate Limits**: Binance allows 1200 requests/minute (IP-based) - code includes rate limiting
- **Caching**: Data cached locally in Parquet format for fast access
- **Sequential Processing**: Recommended for cache efficiency (92.5% hit rate)

## Issues / Known Problems

1. **PyTorch Installation Issue**
   - Error: "Failed to load PyTorch C extensions"
   - May need to reinstall PyTorch or use different installation method
   - See: https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/

2. **PyArrow Missing**
   - Caching works but can't save to Parquet
   - Install: `pip install pyarrow`

## References

- [Binance API Documentation](https://binance-docs.github.io/apidocs/spot/en/#kline-candlestick-data)
- [Lag-Llama Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08278)
- [Chronos Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07815)
- [Polymarket API](https://docs.polymarket.com/)

## Last Updated

2026-01-05

## Recent Changes (Latest)

- ✅ Installed gluonts 0.16.2, PyTorch 2.6.0, lightning, and scipy in conda environment
- ⚠️ Lag-Llama: Not available in gluonts 0.16.2 (module doesn't exist)
- ✅ Chronos-Bolt: Confirmed working and ready for backtesting
- ✅ Updated code to gracefully handle Lag-Llama unavailability

## Recent Changes

- ✅ Implemented Historical Market Fetcher (`agents/backtesting/market_fetcher.py`)
- ✅ Implemented Backtesting Framework (`agents/backtesting/btc_backtester.py`)
- ✅ Improved model integration for Lag-Llama and Chronos-Bolt
- ✅ Created test script for backtesting (`scripts/python/test_backtesting.py`)
- ✅ Updated status documentation
